once around Gaia's black
holes. So the GIA mission, it's a
European Space Agency satellite that was
launched in 2013 in December of that
year about 10 years ago and has been
measuring the positions of stars in the
Milky Way. It attempted to map 1 billion
stars and this was a great leap forward
from the predecessor which was the
Hippoc satellite that only mapped about
150,000 stars. So this was a very much
larger enterprise indeed. But it's still
only a quarter of a percent of all the
stars in the galaxy. But I think that's
enough to give it a really good
sample. Of course, it wouldn't just map
stars. It would pick up distant quazars
and it would pick up nearby moving
objects such as comets and asteroids and
even enable us to detect planets
orbiting around other stars. The main
goal is this 3D mapping to measure not
only the positions of stars on the sky
but work out their distances. So we have
a 3D map but actually a 6D map because
we were going to measure their motion as
well to see whether they were moving
laterally um in two dimensions and
indeed towards or away from us in the
third dimension. So to give us a very
very good idea of the orbits of stars
around the Milky Way. And of course that
leads us to being able to understand how
dark matter is contributing to the
gravity within and around the Milky Way
itself.
Now the spacecraft is all folded up in
terms of its instrumentation wrapped
around a ring structure makes it
convenient and neat to package and
launch but contains instruments
including a photometer for measuring the
stars, their brightnesses and their
motion. a spectrometer for an analyzing
the stars looking at their chemical
composition from their chemical
fingerprint of the dark lines absorbed
in the stars spectrum and also enables a
quick measurement of the color of the
stars which gives us their temperature.
So if we have a look from a different
angle inside the spacecraft, it had a 1
billion pixel camera which was the
largest ever made. Made out of a whole
lot of sensor cells laid out in an array
and the light would be bounced around
the optical path using mirrors inside
the spacecraft. And then as the
spacecraft rotated, the image of the
stars would sweep across the sensors.
And when it reached the left hand side,
it would hit the red and blue stripes
that are slightly separate there. And
those would enable us to simply measure
the relative color, the strength of blue
versus red, and give us an idea of the
temperature of the star. And then there
were prisms and a spectrometer that
allowed us to split the light up and
work out what was happening in terms of
composition and Doppler
effect. Now, all of those measurements
adds up to a huge challenge. It's an
awful lot of data. You've got a billion
stars and you're measuring their motion
in uh and their position. So, six
degrees of freedom plus their color,
that makes seven really. Um and indeed
um if you were going into the spectrum
in any detail which they didn't do for
all of the stars then it would be an
even larger amount of data. So just
imagine the size of the hard disk and
the uh difficulty of shipping this data
around. But we're here to talk about
three of its discoveries. Gaia's black
holes. And the first one, Gia BH1, black
hole number one, was found to be part of
a binary system. And indeed, it was
detected using the radial velocity
method, noticing that the companion star
was moving in an orbit around the center
of mass of the combined system. And from
that motion we can work out that there
must be a heavy dark companion in there.
Now the image at the bottom that is the
image of the companion star dead center
in the image there not the black hole
because the black hole is invisible.
It's black after all and it is in fact
quiet. It's dormant at the moment. There
are no X-rays, no accretion disc. It's
not in the process of
feeding, but from the measurements, we
can figure out that it's about 10 times
the mass of the sun. So, fairly
significant uh black hole in its own
right, probably originating from the
death of a giant
star. And so it's very likely that this
was the larger of a pair of stars, a
binary system, and that this larger star
ran through its life and exploded as a
supernova leading to the black hole
forming. And that the companion star
managed to stay in orbit around it. Its
orbit may have changed. I don't think
we'll ever know that, but it's about
1,500 light years away from us, and
that's a record. It's the closest known
black hole to the
sun. So the companion star is very very
similar to the sun. It's a G-type star.
Temperature
5850 Kelvin, 93% the mass, 99% the
radius, and just a little bit brighter,
106% of the brightness of of our sun.
And you might wonder why we have this
with the star being slightly lower mass
but slightly brighter even though the
radius is about the same. So that's very
interesting and it suggests that perhaps
the combination of elements within the
star is very slightly different and uh
allowing it to burn faster through the
things like the CN O cycle that allows
you to fuse hydrogen more rapidly if you
have some carbon present in the star.
But uh we'll learn more about that as we
go on. Now the orbit is slightly
elliptical 0.54 for the
eccentricity and that means it's uh
about twice as wide as it is high and
the orbit takes just 6 months
185.59 days 0.51
years and the semi- major axis which is
the essentially the radius if you were a
perfectly circular orbit but the
distance from the center to the farthest
point in an ellipse. That's 1.4 times
the Earth's sun distance, the
astronomical unit. And we can use these,
and I'll show you how we do
it. It all goes back to Johannes Kepler
and his studies of the planets of the
solar system and Kepler's third
law. Kepler worked out that the planets
go around the sun in an ellipse. And he
also worked out that if you took the
semi- major
axis and cubed it, so r cubed, and you
squared the period of the orbit, t^ squ,
the time it takes to go around, then
these were always in proportion. And
Isaac Newton proved why and filled in
the constant of proportionality as g his
his constant for the strength of gravity
time m the mass of this central object
divided by 4 pi^ 2. And this is a very
useful formula. We can rearrange it.
take the m over to uh the left and then
set that equal to 4<unk>^ 2 over g r
cubed over t ^ 2. So if we know r and t
and we have an idea of the value of big
g there, then we can work out the mass
the mass just by plugging the numbers
in. But there's a neat trick to avoid
all the horrible use of the calculator
and the nasty value for big G.
And that is to use the fact that in the
solar system the earth goes around the
sun at a distance of 1 AU by definition
and takes one year also by definition.
So in solar system units the mass of the
sun is just 4<unk> ^ 2 g * 1 cub over 1^
2. So all the ones cancel and m sol is
just 4 pi^ 2 over g. So we can plug that
back in and replace the g over 4<unk>^2
with 1 / m soul in the equation and we
get r cubed = m / m soul t ^2 and you
can rearrange that as at the bottom
there m / m soul is r cubed over t ^2
and that works perfectly provided you
remember to get your units correct. You
have to have R in astronomical units and
T in years for this to
work. Of course, we do. And so, we can
take those numbers 0.51 years, square
it.258, take R as 1.4 astronomical
units, cube it to
2.744, take the ratio, we get 10.63 for
the controlling mass.
Now strictly speaking the mass we get is
the total mass of the two systems.
Doesn't make much difference in the
solar system because um the mass of the
sun is so much larger than everything
else. But here the ratio is a little bit
closer. We estimate that the star has a
mass of 93 solar masses. So we need to
subtract that away and we get that the
mass of the black hole is uh 10.63
63 sorry
10.73 and uh that's a very good estimate
indeed. From the mass we can use the
spark shield formula to work out the
radius of the black hole. We get 28 km
for the uh radius of the black hole uh
by taking 2 g over c^ 2 the speed of
light squared and uh plugging in that
mass that we've just calculated. So we
immediately start to know some things
about
BH1. The second object
BH2 is also orbited by a star and it's a
red giant star and we have the
parameters for the orbit just slightly
more elliptical and taking 3 and 1/2
years to go around. So, we can plug
those in and find the mass of BH2. And
that's just a little bit lower, 8.94,
giving a smaller radius of
26.4. And this one's twice as far away,
3,800 light
years. Now, we know the mass of the red
giant star is
1.16 times the mass of our sun, so 16%
more massive. But it's already swollen
up to become a giant 8.6 times the
radius and cooled to 4,600 Kelvin. So
it's gone orange cooling off in its
outer layers. And our sun will do
similar, but not for some
time. The sun will probably spend about
10 billion years on the main sequence
before it turns into a red giant. And
it's about halfway through that now.
4,600 million years old or thereabouts.
But this star must be a bit older. Even
though it's got 16% extra mass, that
will shorten its life. It will burn
faster and hotter in the core, get
through its fuel more rapidly. But it
still with it having entered the giant
phase suggests this is an old system. um
probably 5 6 7 billion years of age. So
considerably older than the
sun. And it's very likely therefore that
the black hole that it is orbiting
around was a giant star and exploded as
a supernova leading to the black hole.
And this may account for why the red
giant star seems to be enriched in
elements that have come from somewhere
else. It's not massive enough to have
made the elements of the alpha sequence.
Things like uh silicon and sulfur and um
neon and magnesium and so forth just
would need to be a much more massive
star. So those have probably come from
somewhere else and they may well have
come from the supernova explosion that
led to the black hole in the first
place. So, BH2 went through its life
cycle,
exploded forming a nine solar mass black
hole. It must have been quite a giant
star to do that. And that
then showered its companion with all
these heavy elements which are now
visible in the outer layers of the star.
So, it's quite an interesting jigsaw
puzzle in that
respect. And the third object is Gaia
BH3. again detected by radial velocity
due to a orbiting companion in a binary
system. This one's 1926 light years
away. So it's just a little bit further
than BH1, but it's a whopper. It's
32.7 solar masses, which is a record for
such a system. And we can of course work
that out in exactly the same way from
the motion of the companion star.
Now, that's big because usually only
around 10% of the mass of a giant star
ends up collapsing into the core and
forming the black
hole.
So, this would be a
327 solar mass star, which is really
extreme and it seems somewhat difficult
to imagine that that could have been the
case. It's not impossible, but it would
be a bit of a record holder. And this
certainly is a record holder for a
stellar mass black hole. So the other
possibility is that this is the result
of the merger of more than one somewhat
smaller black hole, perhaps several of
them, we don't know, building that mass
up each time as they merge together. So
maybe this was a much more complex star
system and we are only seeing two
components remain because the
uh primary ones have all merged together
to form BH2. Of course, we've never seen
them. I suppose it's possible that
there's still separate black holes
orbiting very close together and we
perhaps would not notice that. So there
are definite interesting and intriguing
possibilities here.
But we can also look at where this might
have come from. It seems to be part of a
galactic stream. It's motion through the
galaxy seems to fit with it being part
of galactic stream
ED2. And I've talked about that in my
talk about
the family tree of the Milky Way. So if
you want more about that, it's in there.
But this stream is probably the
disrupted remains of a dwarf galaxy that
came too close to the Milky Way. And now
all the stars have been spaghettified
out into a great long stream, including
this system here,
BH3. And it's also possible to estimate
the age using the companion star and we
get a figure of 13 billion years.
That's as old
as the uh Milky Way itself. Nearly as
old as the universe, which is 13.8
billion years approximately. Um and uh
some of the globular clusters that orbit
around the Milky Way, M92, is 13 billion
years old as well. So there was
obviously um quite a lot of the uh
material produced in very early times
that then has uh gone on to give us
these systems today. And so just a word
about the companion star as well. This
is interesting. It's 3/4 of the mass of
our sun. So an orange dwarf star, 5,200
Kelvin, but it's five times the radius.
So it's swollen up. So it's
relatively low mass star that has
reached the end of its
life. And that's interesting because
this must be very very old indeed. This
is another good way of confirming the
age. A star of 75% the mass of the sun
would live for many, many billions of
years. The sun will live 10.
This seems like 13 is probably about as
old as uh a star can be. So that would
seem to fit with this star being a
highly evolved but lower mass star. And
that fits again with the fact that this
one is very poor in heavy
elements. That suggests a very early
formation date. So in the early universe
just after the big bang there was only
hydrogen and helium and none of the
heavy elements had been made. And so if
this star dates way back to 13 billion
years then that could explain why it
didn't pick up any of them in formation.
But it goes against what I said just now
in terms of the companion BH3 having
resulted from a
supernova
because in the case of uh the other
system BH2 we said that the companion
star would be polluted with heavy
elements by the expan explosion of the
black hole and that hasn't happened
here. So there is the other possibility
which is that this companion star is now
a companion of BH3 but it has not always
been so and it's been captured into
orbit around this very massive black
hole. And so with that I'll leave it
there. These are just a little diagram
of the Milky Way with the positions of
BH1, BH2 and BH3 marked on them. I hope
you've enjoyed that and uh there's some
fascinating details yet to be
discovered, I'm sure. Thanks for
listening.